# Output description

In URVA, results are all written to external files instead of standard
output. All output files have the suffix of “.csv” or “.dat”. The
execution of URVA will abort if a result file with a duplicated name is
found in the current folder. Make sure that current directory is cleaned
up before execution.

## Energy and derivatives

Usually the Self-Consistent Field(SCF) energy is calculated and used to
construct the potential energy surface along the reaction path.

In order to check this value, the `@DATAFILETYPE` must be set to
`old` or `new` and `@ENERGY` must be set to `on`.

The unit of SCF energy is Hartree as one of the atomic units(a.u.). In
order to calculate first and second derivatives of SCF energy against
reaction coordinate/parameter $\mathbf{s}$, cubic spline fitting
is used. For the second derivative of SCF energy, the region between
$\mathbf{s}=-0.1$ and $\mathbf{s}=+0.1$ is predicted via
cubic spline fitting from the information outside this region.

*NOTE: 1 Hartree = 627.509 474 kcal/mol*

Output files:

- `energy.csv`

  SCF energy vs. $\mathbf{s}$

- `energy_1_d.csv`

  First derivative of SCF energy vs. $\mathbf{s}$

- `energy_2_d.csv`

  Second derivative of SCF energy vs. $\mathbf{s}$

## Internal coordinates

The value of user-defined internal coordinates could be calculated. All
types of internal coordinates described in section 2.2.2 are supported.

In order to have this result, `@PARM` must be set to `GeomOnly` or
`All`.

The unit of printed internal coordinates is atomic unit with bohr for
distance and radian for angles.

*NOTE: 1 Bohr = 0.529177 :math:\`AA\`; 1 rad = 57.295 8 :math:\`^\{circ}\`*

Output file:

- `q`$\_$`n.csv`

## Decomposition of reaction path direction and curvature into internal coordinates

In order to have this result, `@PARM` must be set to `All`.

Output files:

- `eta-q_n.csv`

  Decomposition of reaction path direction into internal coordinates

- `kappa-q_n.csv`

  Decomposition of reaction path curvature into internal coordinates

## Generalized vibrational frequency

For any point on reaction path, we could have $3N - K - 1$
vibrations, in which $K$ is the total number of translations and
rotations. In URVA, $K$ takes the value of 6 which excludes the
possibility of analysis of reactions like H$_2$ + H
$\rightarrow$ H + H$_2$ where the whole reaction complex
stays in a linear geometry.

In order to have this result, `@VIBRATION` must be set to `on`.

Output file:

- `freq_dmo.csv`

  Generalized vibrational frequencies vs. $\mathbf{s}$

*NOTE: Unit of frequencies is :math:\`cm^\{-1}\`.*

## Scalar curvature

The original scalar curvature calculated without correction around the
TS region and spike removal will be written to file
`originalkappa.dat`.

In order to have this result, `@DIRCURV` must be set to `on`.

If the CURVCOR and AUTOSMTH modules are used, the corrected curvature
data will be written to `merged.dat`.

If RMSPK module is also used, the curvature data after spike removal
will be written to `merged-nospk.dat`.

## Adiabatic force constant

The adiabatic force constant of chemical bonds between two atoms along
the reaction path will be written to `adiabfc-ka.csv`.

In order to have this result, `@ADIABFC` must be set to `on`.

In some situations, there might be noise in the result. These noise
regions could be nicely removed via cubic spline fitting.

*NOTE: Only result of bond length between 2 atoms could make sense.*
