# Before we start

## History

The original URVA method was implemented by Zoran Konkoli in the link
L716 of Gaussian package. However, this part is never incorporated into
the public version of Gaussian. Since then, many other contributors
including Dr. Wenli Zou added functionalities into this part and
migrated this part from older version of Gaussian into newer version of
Gaussian for several times. As Gaussian package was written in Fortran
77, the corresponding URVA part was written in the same language.

Later on from 2015, Dr. Dieter Cremer and Dr. Elfi Kraka wanted to have
an independent version of URVA program. They asked Yunwen Tao in the
group to this job. He started with programming in Fortran 90 language
which is an extension to Fortran 77. Then he switched the whole project
into Python language which is more flexible and easy to use. The new
version of the URVA program was then named as **URVA**.

## Execution of URVA

The proper execution of URVA requires modern Python3 interpreter.

Here are the list of Python modules needed to run URVA: (1) NumPy, (2)
SciPy, (3) SymPy, (4) sys, (5) os, (6) copy, (7) gc, (8) math and (9)
time.

Make sure that all these modules have been installed properly.

URVA expects and then reads in an external text file as the user input
file. After this file is prepared, in the terminal, type in

`$ python main.py`*\`\`myinputfile\`\`*

From the standard output, we could monitor how the calculation goes. The
calculation results will be dumped into external text files on the disk.

To make life easier, running URVA on ManeFrame cluster is recommended
as URVA has been developed and tested on the same machine. Before
running URVA, remember to load the Python interpreter by using

`$ module load python`

## Theory as Unified Reaction Valley Approach

The name of “Unified Reaction Valley Approach” firstly appeared on scientific
journals in 1997 when Konkoli, Kraka and Cremer published their comprehensive
studies of CH$_3$ + H$_2$ $\rightarrow$ CH$_4$ + H on *J. Phys. Chem.
A*{cite}`firsturva`. In that paper, one of the highlights is to introduce the
approach that calculates the adiabatic mode coupling coefficient that is
decomposition of reaction path curvature into adiabatic local modes which was a
novel approach dealing with vibrational spectroscopy. URVA is based on the
Reaction Path Hamiltonian(RPH) that was intensively developed by Miller,
Handy{cite}`MillerHandy`, Page and McIver{cite}`PageMcIver`. In the year of
2011, Dr. Kraka published a well-written review on the relationship between RPH
and URVA{cite}`Krakareview`. Most recently, Dr. Zou proposed a new approach to
decompose the reaction path direction and curvature into internal coordinates
which opens the possibility to study chemical reactions in large systems, e.g.
organometallic compounds and enzymes{cite}`Zou2016`.

One of the most important papers involved in URVA is the introduction of
Diabatic Mode Ordering(DMO) procedure which has now been widely used in
several projects within CATCO group{cite}`dmopaper`.
